# Refetching

## Refetch fields

If an object has an `id: ID!` field, Isograph will generate a `__refetch` field on each selection of that type. If you select that field, Isograph will generate a query for all of the fields selected on that object in the (merged) parent query.

Importantly, this includes fields selected in other resolvers, and not just in children! If one resolver selected the `__refetch` field on a given user and **another** resolver selected `name` field on that same user, the generated `__refetch` query would include the `name` field.

This is a quite restrictive choice, and more customizability needs to be introduced. But it has the advantage of meaning that if the set of fields selected on a given object change, the refetch queries will be regenerated by the compiler and reflect the changes. So, developers can modify components without concern about breaking refetch queries.

## How do we use this `__refetch` field?

Consider:

```tsx
export const PetRefetcherButtonComponent = iso(`
  field PetRefetcherButtonComponent on Pet {
    name
    __refetch
  }
`)((data) => {
  return (
    <Button onClick={() => data.__refetch()[1]()}>Refetch {data.name}</Button>
  );
});
```

When read out, the `__refetch` field is a function(\*) that when called will make a network request to refetch the field. (Also, in the future, you will be able to do things like get the status of the mutation, suspend on it, etc. For now, it just triggers a mutation in the background.)

> The signature of the `__refetch` field is `(args: Variables) => [string /* unique id */, () => void /* makes network request */]`. It will be changed to be the same signature as loadable fields (i.e. `(args: Variables) => [string /* unique id */, () => [DisposeFn, FragmentReference]]`).

The fields selected on the mutation response (under the pet) will be **exactly the fields that are selected on that Pet in the merged query**, including `name` and the auto-selected `id`, as well as any fields selected on the same `Pet` in other resolvers.

You can view the generated mutation query by looking for a file whose name starts with `__refetch__`.
